NEWSMAKER PANETTA, JOURNALIST CULLUM: Q & A RE: USA  
Leon Panetta, a man in the news for decades, continues to be in the headlines. In fact, he'll be involved in two special Q & A Council programs just weeks before he may be summoned to testify in a Congressional investigation of the attack on Benghazi. 

At a luncheon program in Fort Worth and an evening program in Dallas on Wednesday, March 18, former Secretary of Defense Panetta, regarded as "the man who masterminded the plan to kill Osama bin Laden," will be questioned by legendary Texas journalist Lee Cullum. The host of KERA-TV's CEO series, she is also a veteran print and broadcast force known for her polite, firm and direct questioning.

Secretary Panetta's programs are part of the Council's 2015 series "Focus on Intelligence." 
He is author of the recently published Worthy Fights: A Memoir of Leadership in War and Peace. Where did he do his research? On the job as a Congressman, as White House Chief of Staff, as Central Intelligence Director and as Secretary of Defense.  [FYI: When you purchase a ticket to either program, you will receive a free copy of the Secretary's book, a perfect addition to the programs as he'll be signing books afterward.]

While serving as a U.S. Representative from California (1977-1993), he became known as "the man who saved the U.S. Food Stamp Program." Secretary Panetta was Director of the Office of Management and Budget (1993-1994) before becoming President Bill Clinton's White House Chief of Staff (1994-1997.) He served as CIA Director (2009-2011) before becoming Secretary of Defense (2011-2013). These topics and more will fascinate listeners as the Secretary and the Journalist examine his career, his triumphs and his concerns about current presidential policies. He is among witnesses scheduled to testify in April when U.S. Rep. Trey Gowdy (R-S.C.) conducts an investigation into the attack on Benghazi.

Secretary Panetta’s appearances are made possible by the Billingsley Company. The program in Fort Worth is presented in partnership with the Fort Worth Club. Transportation is provided by Smith Transportation. Media sponsor is KERA.

THE WINTRY SEARCH FOR AUTHORS
The author programs the Council schedules in spring, summer and beyond are like tulips -- the ideas are planted in winter and they spring to glory in warmer times. While North Texans were enjoying spring-like temps in late January, Council President Jim Falk, Vice President of Programs Rachel Vogel and Programs Manager and Meridian: Global Young Professionals Coordinator Alana Buenrostro were slogging through snow and ice in New York City scouting for authors. 

In a 2-day span they went through 9 meetings with publishers who have significant books due out soon. Not all authors will come to North Texas, but some will have a place on the Council calendar. (One possibility Jon Meacham, author of a book about George H.W. Bush, The Last Gentleman, due in the fall.)

No time for sight-seeing but there were celebrity sightings such as actor Jon Voight and Al Jazeera America news anchor (and former Council speaker) John Segenthaler. Alana says watching him "in between takes/shots was hilarious." Rachel says, "I never knew how many people it took to go from one scene to the next scene or photo or commentator and how many things get changed last minute because the commentator wasn’t ready in time… Fascinating!"

FYI:  There was one casualty this trip. Council members who have traveled with President Falk are familiar with his famous "travel hat" a veteran of many miles. It was lost somewhere during this wintry visit to New York. Like wonderful tulips, it may, too, appear in the spring when the weather warms and the snow melts. 



BEST-SELLER GLADWELL, HISTORIC TEACHERS -- A MATCH
When best-selling author and staff writer at The New Yorker Malcolm Gladwell speaks to the annual International Educator of the Year Award luncheon on April 16, there will be history in the house! For the first time the International Education Program will present TWO teachers with prestigious award. Juli Warner and Rhonda Pugh are being honored not only for their Arlington Martin High School classroom work but especially for a groundbreaking moment in the Council's history.  Juli came up with the idea in 2004 and she and Rhonda then established the first Junior World Affairs Council, a concept that now has become a tradition in more than 40 North Texas public, private and charter schools, and continues to grow.
Gladwell's topic for the luncheon is his latest book, David and Goliath: Underdogs, Misfits and the Art of Battling Giants. He has a special feeling for teachers as evident in an earlier best-seller, The Outliers, when he wrote, "Being a teacher is meaningful."


CASTRO, JEFFERSON: CONTRAST AND COMPARE
"Contrast" -- that is the theme for 2015 travel at the World Affairs Council.
May 19-26 the Council goes to Cuba, where democracy is a stranger.  Then September 2-4, the Council goes to Monticello, home of Thomas Jefferson, author of the American Declaration of Independence and the passage that is a foundation of democracy, "We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness."

While Cuba's Fidel Castro, describing himself as a "Marxist-Leninist" once said, "The universities are available only to those who share my revolutionary beliefs," Thomas Jefferson founded the University of Virginia as a public school that would, he said, "be a temptation to the youth of other states to come, and drink of the cup of knowledge."

The Council is currently taking reservations for both trips -- you'll be able to compare the frozen-in-time aspect of Cuba with "preserved for time" nature of Monticello. The Cuba trip is open to the Council members and guests.

The visit to Monticello is part of the Council's continuing program, the Global Forum Presidential Legacy Tour. You must be a member of the Council's Global Forum to attend. (Join at the Global Forum level today!) The Global Forum Presidential Legacy Tours have previously visited the Reagan and Nixon presidential libraries in California and now will focus on Thomas Jefferson.  There are 13 presidential libraries, including three in Texas.  

FLASHPOINTS -- ANALYZING EUROPE
Today's Europe is a swarm of situations: The Russian questions -- Ukraine and Putin.  Economic challenges to the European Union. Terrorists. Disintegrating relationships and global pressures.

All of those things inhabit the constantly changing political and economic landscape of Europe.  But so, too, do the "passions that had defined Europe prior to 1945," according to George Friedman. He is the founder of the Austin-based global intelligence firm Stratfor and is both its CEO and Chief Intelligence Officer. Friedman, the second speaker in the Council's multipart 2015 Focus on Intelligence Series, has been watching the geopolitical dynamics at work in Europe for decades. He once noted, "In geopolitics a nation has no permanent allies or permanent enemies, only permanent interests.”

His analyses of the challenges facing Europeans and, as a result of diplomatic relations, others around the globe, are outlined in his latest book, Flashpoints: The Emerging Crisis in Europe. Respected Kirkus Reviews called it, "A thoughtful, uncluttered treatise considering Europe’s intractable patterns of unemployment, immigration and racism." Friedman's appearance is a program of the World Affairs Councils of America in partnership with the Delegation of the European Union to the United States.

YOU, YOUR COUNCIL & PASSION FOR THE FUTURE
Sometimes you may wonder what your support of the Council does. It inspires. We found the exciting answer at an International Career Day created by our International Education Program for Dallas Independent School District schools.

"I think a passion has been ignited in our students like never before," said Michelle Neely, the associate principal at DISD's Barack Obama Male Leadership Academy, which hosted the event. 
She told us she'd "informally" polled students and found that they'd become "interested in learning more about human rights."

Rick Halperin of SMU's Embry Human Rights Program was among the guests speaking to more than 300 students and 15 teachers from Dallas high schools and Cedar Hill High School. The day-long event at the Obama Academy featured experienced professionals discussing international careers in human rights, business, diplomacy, law, journalism, intelligence and engineering.

Associate Principal Neely described the Council as "such a profound benefit for students."
The IEP annually hosts a regional international career day and sometimes organizes similar events for individual districts. For information or to volunteer to speak, contact IEP Executive Director Jennifer Bowden at jbowden@dfwworld.org.


TWO REUNIONS IN WASHINGTON: A NOBEL LAUREATE & FORMER INTERNS
The occasion was the Global Ties U.S. National Meeting in Washington and one of the featured speakers has two Council connections. Oscar Arias, former president of Costa Rica and Nobel Peace Prize winner in 1987, is (1) an alumnus of the International Visitor Leadership Program with which the Council works frequently and (2) in 2002, Council International Visitor and Program Manager Chelsea Marshall met him at a Sister Cities International Conference in Fort Worth when she was in high school. (With President Arias in the photo are, from left, International Visitor and Student Program Coordinator Jameson Hall, Chelsea and Council Executive Vice President and Dallas Chief of Protocol Beth Sabo Huddleston.)

In a happy addition to the visit, our Council travelers also ran into old friends at the Global Ties meeting, former interns in Dallas, including Kim Starfield (2011) and Caroline Frattaroli (2013). Kim currently is Assistant Protocol Officer for theU.S. Department of Homeland Security. Caroline is studying at the Walsh School of Foreign Service at Georgetown University. 

The Council representatives were in Washington, says Chelsea, "to promote our region and advocate to our Legislators the importance of international education programs."

THE PARTNERSHIP SERIES CONTINUES
After a successful February opening with Ambassador Arturo Sarukahn discussing "U.S./Mexico Relations:  A Long-Term Perspective," our special series "Strengthening the Partnership: Mexico & Texas" continues this spring. The topic on March 25 is "Political Issues in Texas/Mexico Relations: Immigration and Security. On April 30, the discussion focuses on "Economic Issues in Texas/Mexico Relations: Trade and Energy Opportunities."

This important series is present by the Council in partnership with the Consulate General of Mexico in Dallas, The Dallas Morning News and the Mexico Institute of the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington, D.C. 

It is sponsored by Dell Services; Haynes and Boone, LLP; AT&T; Aeromexico; Rosewood Crescent and the Latino Education Institute, Inc. Media sponsor is The Dallas Morning News.
All events are open to the public and offer special World Affairs Council membership prices. Monitor the Council's events calendar for additional programs in this important series.


PERSPECTIVE AND EFFERVESCENCE
On March 20, historian, novelist and wit Elizabeth Hoffman, the Stanford Professor of American Foreign Relations at San Diego State University, will discuss "The Next 40 Years of U.S. Foreign Policy" for our 2015 International Perspectives Series. She says a reviewer once "made my writing sound rather like an ad for 7Up, but I felt effervescent and sparkly just the same." We asked her "Our Famous Questions."

You've credited western writer Louis L'Amour with inspiring you to become a historian. Which of his books is your favorite and do you ever go horseback-riding?
"Horseback-riding? De seguro! (No westerner would admit otherwise.) But for the record, I tend to be the type of woman who hacks away at her typewriter while baking a pie. … As to Louis L’Amour, it’s difficult to have a favorite book since he always wrote the same one. Each as engrossing as the next."

Favorite personality in American history?
"The sexiest man of the American Revolution, naturally: Alexander Hamilton. (That is, until I think about his wife Eliza, who almost had him beat for guts.) Hamilton was the classic triple threat to anyone who resented him as that bastard upstart from the West Indies: military hero, financial genius, brilliant writer, wily politician. He had it all—and threw it all away."

I get my news from?
"Frankly, I get a lot of my news from my kids, who are wired to the Internet. 'Mom, haven’t you heard...?' Alternatively, I read The New York Times and The Economist, which are the best written publications in the English language."

My favorite day as an educator was the day… 
"Any day that a student comes up after class and says 'I had no idea that . . . !' ” 

Most interesting nation in the world? 
"Outside of the United States, the most interesting country is China (which is terribly sad since it’s one of those I’ve not yet visited). In modern history, the United States invented the democratic nation-state. In ancient history, China invented the multi-ethnic empire. Empires and nations are the only types of human government other than tribes and city-states. Important stuff."

The bonus round from Professor Hoffman.
 If I could choose an American historical secret to be declassified, it would be…?
"Just publish the damn volume of Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) on the CIA intervention in Iran in 1953. Inaugurated by Abraham Lincoln, FRUS is one of America’s grandest achievements. Our willingness to be transparent, and talk about both mistakes and successes, is what makes our country great. Fess up and move on, I say."

When I write it is usually morning/evening and the music playing in the background is….?  "I write whenever I can—morning, noon, or night—and hear nothing while I’m working. Is the music still on? (Must be Bach.) When the laptop goes off, I’m dancing two-step to Lady Antebellum."



















